[0.34] DAG only deploys (#3269)
astronomer/docs: software/deploy-dags.md

---
sidebar_label: 'Deploy DAGs using the CLI'
title: 'Deploy DAGs to Astronomer Software using the Astro CLI'
id: deploy-dags
description: Learn how to enable and trigger DAG-only deploys on Astronomer Software.
---

DAG-only deploys are the fastest way to deploy code to Astronomer Software. They are recommended if you only need to deploy changes made to the `dags` directory of your Astro project.

When this feature is enabled, you must still do a full project deploy when you make a change to any file in your Astro project that isn't in the `dags` directory, or when you [upgrade Astro Runtime](manage-airflow-versions.md).

DAG-only deploys have the following benefits:

- DAG-only deploys are faster than project deploys.
- Deployments pick up DAG-only deploys without restarting. This results in a more efficient use of workers and no downtime for your Deployments.

> - If you have a CI/CD process that includes both DAG and image-based deploys, you can use your repository's permissions to control which users can perform which kinds of deploys.

Author: This bullet is about applying permissions at the repository level, rather than the Astronomer level. E.g. you can set it on GitHub so that only specific users can commit to the DAGs folder and others can commit to `requirements.txt`

> - If you have a CI/CD process that includes both DAG and image-based deploys, you can use your repository's permissions to control which users can perform which kinds of deploys.

Author: This bullet is about applying permissions at the repository level, rather than the Astronomer level. E.g. you can set it on GitHub so that only specific users can commit to the DAGs folder and others can commit to requirements.txt

> - You can use DAG deploys to update your DAGs when you have slow upload speed on your internet connection.

Reviewer: We should probably rephrase this to be more objective rather than subjective:
```suggestion
- DAG deploys transmit significantly less data in most cases, which makes them quicker than image deploys when upload speeds to the Airflow Deployment are slow.
```

## Enable the feature

> By default, the Astro CLI only supports complete project image deploys. To enable DAG-only deploys:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the Astro CLI is configured for complete project image deploys. To enable DAG-only deploys:
```

1. Open your Deployment in the Astronomer Software UI.
2. In the **Settings** tab under the **DAG Deployment** section, change the **Mechanism** to **DAG Only Deployment**. 

## Trigger a DAG-only deploy

> To trigger a DAG-only deploy, run the following command from the terminal:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the following terminal command to trigger a DAG-only deploy:
```

```sh

> astro deploy --dags

Author: ```suggestion
astro deploy --dags <deployment-id>
```

```

> You can still run `astro deploy` to trigger a complete project deploy. When you do this, the Astro CLI builds all project files into a Docker image except for your DAGs, which it deploys through the DAG deploy mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can still run `astro deploy` to trigger a complete project deploy. When you do this, the Astro CLI builds all project files except for your DAGs into a Docker image, then deploys the dags using the DAG deploy mechanism.
```

## How DAG-only deploys work

> Each Deployment includes a Pod that processes DAG only deploys called the `dag-server`. When a user triggers a DAG-only deploy to a Deployment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Deployment includes a Pod that processes DAG only deploys called the `dag-server`, and each Airflow pod has a sidecar container to download new dags when they are available. When a user triggers a DAG-only deploy to a Deployment:
```

> - The Astro CLI bundles the DAG code as a TAR file and pushes it to the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Astro CLI bundles the DAG code as a gzipped TAR file and uploads it to the server.
```

- The server sends a signal to the Deployment DAG downloader sidecar that there are new DAGs to download.

> - The Airflow components download the new DAG code from the DAG downloader sidecar and begin running the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The DAG downloader in each Airflow component downloads the new DAGs from the DAG server.
- Airflow scans the dags directory on its configured interval and processes the changed files.
```

https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/configurations-ref.html#dag-dir-list-interval

If you deploy DAGs to a Deployment that is running a previous version of your code, then the following happens:

> - Tasks that are `running` continue to run on existing workers and are not interrupted unless the task does not complete within 24 hours of the code deploy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Tasks that are `running` continue to run on existing workers and are not interrupted unless the task does not complete within 24 hours of the DAG deploy.
```

> - One or more new workers are created alongside your existing workers and immediately start executing scheduled tasks based on your latest code.

Reviewer: Is this true? I think the existing worker just scans the files and processes them. AFAIK no new workers are created.

Author: Whoops this is leftover from Astro, deleting

> - One or more new workers are created alongside your existing workers and immediately start executing scheduled tasks based on your latest code.

Author: ```suggestion
```

    These new workers execute downstream tasks of DAG runs that are in progress. For example, if you deploy to Astronomer when `Task A` of your DAG is running, `Task A` continues to run on an old Celery worker. If `Task B` and `Task C` are downstream of `Task A`, they are both scheduled on new Celery workers running your latest code.

    This means that DAG runs could fail due to downstream tasks running code from a different source than their upstream tasks. DAG runs that fail this way need to be fully restarted from the Airflow UI so that all tasks are executed based on the same source code.

> When you run `astro deploy` to deploy a complete project image, your non-DAG files are deployed as a Docker image while your DAG files are deployed directly to the `dag-server`.

Author: ```suggestion
When you run `astro deploy` to deploy a complete project image, the Astro CLI builds all project files including your DAGs into a Docker image as described in [Deploy a project image](deploy-cli.md).
```

- DAG deploys transmit significantly less data in most cases, which makes them quicker than image deploys when upload speeds to the Deployment are slow.

## Enable the feature

:::danger

When you enable DAG-only Deployments, all DAGs in your Deployment will be removed. To continue running your DAGs, you must redeploy them using `astro deploy --dags`. 

:::

By default, Deployments are configured only for complete project image deploys. To enable DAG-only deploys:

1. Open your Deployment in the Astronomer Software UI.
2. In the **Settings** tab under the **DAG Deployment** section, change the **Mechanism** to **DAG Only Deployment**. 
3. Click **Deploy changes**
4. Redeploy your DAGs using `astro deploy --dags`. See [Trigger a DAG-only deploy](#trigger-a-dag-only-deploy). This step is required due to all DAGs in your deployed image being erased when you enable the feature. 

## Trigger a DAG-only deploy

Run the following command to trigger a DAG-only deploy:

```sh
astro deploy --dags <deployment-id>
```

> You can still run `astro deploy` to trigger a complete project deploy. When you do this, the Astro CLI builds all project files including your DAGs into a Docker image as described in [Deploy a project image](deploy-cli.md).

Reviewer: I think we should improve this wording. The current wording "Astro CLI builds all project files including your DAGs into a Docker image" implies that it is relevant that the dags are included in the image, when it's not. those dags will never be seen by a dag-deploy enabled deployment.

> ## How DAG-only deploys work

Reviewer: It's interesting that we included this section. We do not appear to include a section like this for any other implementation.

```sh
astro deploy --dags <deployment-id>
```

:::info

You can still run `astro deploy` to trigger a complete project deploy. When you do this, the Astro CLI builds all project files excluding DAGs into a Docker image and deploys the image. It then deploys your DAGs separately using the DAG deploy mechanism.

:::

:::info

If you deploy DAGs to a Deployment that is running a previous version of your code, then tasks that are `running` continue to run on existing workers and are not interrupted unless the task does not complete within 24 hours of the DAG deploy.

These new workers execute downstream tasks of DAG runs that are in progress. For example, if you deploy to Astronomer when `Task A` of your DAG is running, `Task A` continues to run on an old Celery worker. If `Task B` and `Task C` are downstream of `Task A`, they are both scheduled on new Celery workers running your latest code.

This means that DAG runs could fail due to downstream tasks running code from a different source than their upstream tasks. DAG runs that fail this way need to be fully restarted from the Airflow UI so that all tasks are executed based on the same source code.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> 
> 
> If you deploy DAGs to a Deployment that is running a previous version of your code, then the following happens:
> 
> - Tasks that are `running` continue to run on existing workers and are not interrupted unless the task does not complete within 24 hours of the DAG deploy.
> 
>     These new workers execute downstream tasks of DAG runs that are in progress. For example, if you deploy to Astronomer when `Task A` of your DAG is running, `Task A` continues to run on an old Celery worker. If `Task B` and `Task C` are downstream of `Task A`, they are both scheduled on new Celery workers running your latest code.
> 
>     This means that DAG runs could fail due to downstream tasks running code from a different source than their upstream tasks. DAG runs that fail this way need to be fully restarted from the Airflow UI so that all tasks are executed based on the same source code.

Author: ```suggestion

If you deploy DAGs to a Deployment that is running a previous version of your code, then tasks that are `running` continue to run on existing workers and are not interrupted unless the task does not complete within 24 hours of the DAG deploy.

These new workers execute downstream tasks of DAG runs that are in progress. For example, if you deploy to Astronomer when `Task A` of your DAG is running, `Task A` continues to run on an old Celery worker. If `Task B` and `Task C` are downstream of `Task A`, they are both scheduled on new Celery workers running your latest code.

This means that DAG runs could fail due to downstream tasks running code from a different source than their upstream tasks. DAG runs that fail this way need to be fully restarted from the Airflow UI so that all tasks are executed based on the same source code.
```

```

:::info

You can still run `astro deploy` to trigger a complete project deploy. When you do this, the Astro CLI builds all project files excluding DAGs into a Docker image and deploys the image. It then deploys your DAGs separately using the DAG deploy mechanism.

:::

## How DAG-only deploys work

If you deploy DAGs to a Deployment that is running a previous version of your code, then the following happens:

- Tasks that are `running` continue to run on existing workers and are not interrupted unless the task does not complete within 24 hours of the DAG deploy.

    These new workers execute downstream tasks of DAG runs that are in progress. For example, if you deploy to Astronomer when `Task A` of your DAG is running, `Task A` continues to run on an old Celery worker. If `Task B` and `Task C` are downstream of `Task A`, they are both scheduled on new Celery workers running your latest code.

    This means that DAG runs could fail due to downstream tasks running code from a different source than their upstream tasks. DAG runs that fail this way need to be fully restarted from the Airflow UI so that all tasks are executed based on the same source code.

> When you run `astro deploy` to deploy a complete project image, the Astro CLI builds all project files including your DAGs into a Docker image as described in [Deploy a project image](deploy-cli.md).

Author: ```suggestion
```

:::danger

When you update a Deployment to support DAG-only deploys, all DAGs in your Deployment will be removed. To continue running your DAGs, you must redeploy them using `astro deploy --dags`. 

:::

By default, Deployments are configured only for complete project image deploys. To enable DAG-only deploys:

1. Open your Deployment in the Astronomer Software UI.
2. In the **Settings** tab under the **DAG Deployment** section, change the **Mechanism** to **DAG Only Deployment**. 
3. Click **Deploy changes**
4. Redeploy your DAGs using `astro deploy --dags`. See [Trigger a DAG-only deploy](#trigger-a-dag-only-deploy). This step is required due to all DAGs in your deployed image being erased when you enable the feature. 

## Trigger a DAG-only deploy

Run the following command to trigger a DAG-only deploy:

```sh
astro deploy --dags <deployment-id>
```

:::info

You can still run `astro deploy` to trigger a complete project deploy. When you do this, the Astro CLI builds all project files excluding DAGs into a Docker image and deploys the image. It then deploys your DAGs separately using the DAG deploy mechanism.

:::

## How DAG-only deploys work

> Each Deployment includes a Pod that processes DAG only deploys called the `dag-server`, and each Airflow component has a sidecar container to download new DAGs when they are available. When a user triggers a DAG-only deploy to a Deployment:

Reviewer 2: These are internal implementation details. I don't this we should be revealing these in the pretext of IP

Reviewer: my concern is less about IP, since this is all viewable source, but more that these details do not directly affect users, and may change in the future.

> Each Deployment includes a Pod that processes DAG only deploys called the `dag-server`, and each Airflow component has a sidecar container to download new DAGs when they are available. When a user triggers a DAG-only deploy to a Deployment:
> 
> - The Astro CLI bundles the DAG code as a `.tar.gz` file and uploads it to the server.
> - The server sends a signal to the Deployment DAG downloader sidecar that there are new DAGs to download.
> - The DAG downloader in each Airflow component downloads the new DAGs from the DAG server.
> - Airflow scans the dags directory on its configured interval and processes the changed files.

Author: ```suggestion
```

## Enable the feature

:::danger

> When you enable DAG-only Deployments, all DAGs in your Deployment will be erased. To continue running your DAGs, you must redeploy them using `astro deploy --dags`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you enable DAG-only Deployments, all DAGs in your Deployment will be removed. To continue running your DAGs, you must redeploy them using `astro deploy --dags`. 
```

:::

By default, Deployments are configured only for complete project image deploys. To enable DAG-only deploys:

1. Open your Deployment in the Astronomer Software UI.
2. In the **Settings** tab under the **DAG Deployment** section, change the **Mechanism** to **DAG Only Deployment**. 
3. Click **Deploy changes**

> 4. Redeploy any DAGs that were erased as a result of the configuration change. See [Trigger a DAG-only deploy](#trigger-a-dag-only-deploy)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Deploy your DAGs. This step is required when enabling the dag-deploy feature, which removes dag files that were deployed with the image. See [Trigger a DAG-only deploy](#trigger-a-dag-only-deploy)
```

:::danger

> When you enable DAG-only Deployments, all DAGs in your Deployment will be removed. To continue running your DAGs, you must redeploy them using `astro deploy --dags`. 

Reviewer: Hmm. Actually this isn't true either. astro-cli now does a double-deploy when dag-deploy is enabled. It will deploy the image and then immediately afterwards deploy the dags. It's too early in the morning for me to come up with good wording for how this works though.

1. Open your Deployment in the Astronomer Software UI.
2. In the **Settings** tab under the **DAG Deployment** section, change the **Mechanism** to **DAG Only Deployment**. 
3. Click **Deploy changes**

> 4. Redeploy your DAGs using `astro deploy --dags`. See [Trigger a DAG-only deploy](#trigger-a-dag-only-deploy). This step is required due to all DAGs in your deployed image being erased when you enable the feature. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Redeploy your DAGs using `astro deploy --dags`. See [Trigger a DAG-only deploy](#trigger-a-dag-only-deploy). This step is required due to all DAGs in your deployed image being removed from the airflow deployment when you enable the feature. 
```
